---
layout: post
author: Balázs Pál
title : DS lab - Cosmic Microwave Background - Report 1.
date: 2020-10-07T20:00:00Z
featured-image: ../assets/images/posts/cmb/cmb_ang_spec_map_orig.png
featured-image-alt: My first attempt to recreate the CMB map
---
<b>
This is my first report for the course "Data Science Laboratory" in the second semester in 2020-2021 on ELTE. In this article, I will briefly summarize all the relevant information about my semester project and then detail my work so far on it.
</b>

## I. Introduction
As an MSc Physics student on ELTE enrolled in the Data Science specialization, we need to pass the mandatory course called "Data Science Laboratory". The exact goals of the course are meticulously articulated in the subject’s [GitHub repo](https://github.com/sdam-elte/dslab2020) as <i>"...to instill the practical skills needed for exploratory data analysis. With the acquired knowledge the student shall be able to perform independent research requiring the handling of big data."</i>

At the beginning of the semester each student must select a task from a list of existing projects and make reports and oral presentations about the topic every other week. I've chosen the task involving work with the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation (or CMB for short), which I need to study both from the computer simulation and the data analysis side.

## II. Theoretical background
### II./1. Basics of the CMB
Even those with basic interest and knowledge in astronomy have heard of the CMB probably, at least on an elementary level. The notority of this phenomenon implies it correctly, that it is an obviously actively studied field in astronomy. The reason is that the CMB has an essential role in the understanding of fundamental questions and topics in physics. It is used eg. to determine cosmological parameters or to better understand the events following the Big Bang.

In its core nature CMB is an immensely redshifted black-body radiation with average colour temperature of $2.725$ K. By saying "CMB" we actually refer to the collection of those photons, which already existed during the recombination period of the universe. For a long period, the universe was opaque. Photons created in the Big Bang constantly scattered on electrons in this very dense and hot so-called "gas-universe". After approximately $370\,000$ years after the Big Bang the universe cooled to a point (to $\approx 3000$ K), where the formation of hydrogen atoms was energetically favorable. We say, that at this point the existing photons "decoupled from the matter" (they stopped being constantly scattered on electrons), their mean free path increased by an intangible extent, they stopped being in constant thermodynamical equilibrium with free electrons and the universe become electromagnetically transparent. These photons travel through space since then, but due to the expansion of the universe they redshifted by a factor of $z = 1100$ from this original $3000$ K to the already mentioned $2.725$ K.